The Evolving Elders


        It has been thoroughly researched that the age difference between seniors and the youth often lead to different problem formulation and problem solving. Much of the literature debates that elders will often prioritize emotions of those around them compared to the youth who are more solution focused and arriving at it efficiently. The evidence presented is that elders normally have had much more experience in dealing with people and emotions due to their age than younger people. Another piece of evidence was the way an individual person perceived their ability to solve the problem or one’s self-efficacy, and most times when one believed they were able to solve a problem lead to a much higher chance of actually coming to solve that problem. Currently there exists a division between problem solving as a youth and as a senior, but as technology and internet progresses the self-efficacy of seniors allowing them to solve much more than they originally thought they were capable of. ***this could be the abstract instead***
        As people age they gain many life experiences and learning about the world and emotions interact with one another, and they have failed a great deal with issues. Their ability to solve problems pertaining to day to day issues come from their failures and shortcomings. (following the work of failures to success) Their ability to solve interpersonal problems are much better than that of the youth according to Fredda Blanchard-Fields since her research suggests “that older adults effectively solve everyday problems because of their ability to balance emotion regulation with proactive instrumental strategies.” (Fredda Blanchard-Fields 2007) The study conducted included people in two demographics young(18-27) and old(60-80) and during the study situations were created and given to the participants and they had to choose strategies to endorse to use when faced with the problems. Often times the older demographic tended towards passive emotional balancing strategies whereas the youth stuck to more active strategies like avoidance-denial for instrumental problems like dealing with cashiers. While for interpersonal problems the elders again stuck to more passive strategies. This proves that with age and experience is the only way to fully understand the complexity of some family interpersonal problems. The preference towards passive strategies compared to active to achieve their goals also displays their care for those around them and possible fear of losing touch with those they love. Jahnke and Camp have also added that “it suggests that older adults have the ability to engage in cognitively complex strategies,” and that “to understand age differences in instrumental strategies more fully, the emotional salience of the problem situation and emotion-focused strategies need to be taken into consideration.” (Jahnke Camp 1995) The seniors are some of the best people for solving emotional interpersonal problems due to their ability to see the big picture in emotionally important problems along with the experience and failures of their past endeavors to get to solutions. They were able to manage complex social issues while maintaining their own emotions and the emotions of family and friends around them. Although the older demographic possess the ability to deal with interpersonal problems efficiently, there is still the issue of other conflicts in their life. To deal with these they can be inspired with higher perceived self-efficacy to assist them in formulating solutions apt to solving the problem at hand. 
        Self-efficacy is defined as the belief that one has for the ability to complete a task, and it is currently believed that possessing self-efficacy leads to success in certain tasks. Often issues related to interpersonal problems and problems within their realm of caring about like doctors appointments, and other hobbies are easy for elders to solve since it lies within the realm of what matters to their life on a regular basis, yet with solving puzzles much like the youth it depend on their belief of whether or not they would be able to solve the issues. Pezzuit finds that “the relations between self-efficacy perceptions and performance were correlational.” (Artistico, Cervone, & Pezzuti 2003) Her tests included giving separate age demographics different kinds of problems then having to give their confidence levels in solving the problem (self-efficacy) and then recording their performance. They also found that “older adults had higher self-efficacy on problems that were ecologically relevant to them.”(Artistico, Cervone, & Pezzuiti 2003) They had also found the same with problems relevant to the young adults in the study, which explains the idea that past experience with relevant problems to yourself leads to higher self confidence in the ability to solve said problems. Belief in one’s self or self-efficacy plays a major part in the solving of problems, and there is a whole theory dedicated to studying it. It has been proven that depending on your personal belief will affect how you approach, and defeat the problems and specific situations at hand. Although we understand how essential a high amount of self-efficacy can be how can one formulate strategies to consistently get it.
        Many different factors are summed up when dealing with self-efficacy, several on the conscious and several on the subconscious, but one way to increase their self-efficacy in everyday problems is through the internet and information gathering. Often problems are scary only when less information is known, but now that we are living in the information generation, getting information about everyday problems is becoming easier and easier. Instead of having calling your friend or grandson who happens to be a plumber, one could search up plumbing tips so they could know if the issue was something they could fix on their own before they had to hire a plumber. Along with that we will be able to search up solutions to nearly everything other than interpersonal people problems which are solely learned through experience. For the future of research one must look at how problems are approached in the modern technology age. It's possible that some people will still be hesitant to technology and not be willing to look up solutions to problems and instead just complain to their friends, but with the power of the internet it will inspire others to believe that they can solve their own conflicts on their own with a bit of persistence. 
        (Outro)